https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=njbpi3YTMPY
Mahault Albarracin ~ Active Inference Insights 002 ~ Epistemic Communities, Social Scripts, AI
Hello everybody and welcome back to the Active Inference Insights podcast brought to you by the Active Inference Institute. I'm your host Darius Parvin Wayne and today I have the pleasure of chatting to Mahault Albarracin. Mahault is a cognitive computing PhD candidate at the University of Quebec in Montreal as well as the Director of Product Innovations and Research at Verses, a company which leads the way in applying the active inference framework to AI. With expertise in computational neuroscience, sexology, consciousness and much more, Mahault's work is broad, innovative and deeply exciting, which makes me rather excited for this conversation. Mahault, welcome to the show. Thank you so much for joining us, it's an absolute pleasure.
Well thanks for having me. So as I sort of mentioned in the introduction, your work covers a very broad range of topics and areas of research, but as you know this podcast is exploring the themes of active inference and the free energy principle, so I want to mainly focus on that even though we can see about how these different themes tie in with that overarching framework. If one goes on your Google Scholar and sees your work on active inference, again they'll see it's diverse. Where I want to start is the paper that you wrote on epistemic communities. I guess the first question our audience might have, just as a reminder for those listening, this podcast is very much meant as a gentle introduction to active inference, as gentle as an introduction to active inference can be. So just for our audience my first question is very simple and it's just what is an epistemic community?
So it has many definitions, it's a loosely used term in a variety of fields but the way we've used it is essentially a community of people that share very specific types of beliefs that lead them to sample reality in the same way. So if you think about like your norms, they usually are tied to a specific way of thinking. Like for instance the fact of going to work, the fact of going to work 9 to 5 is tied to an ideology that values a certain type of productivity, consumerism etc. and a certain type of relationships where we are together in the morning, together in the evening and we are with different people during the day etc. So your life becomes shaped by these ideas that give rise to norms.
Cool, and let's sort of tie in the active inference framework then to this idea that we have a community which is tied together through sampling similar norms, similar sensory observations. Perhaps you could start just by giving us a brief or relatively accessible notion of what active inference is. I mean Karl did a very good job last week at explicating this, maybe just as a reminder to people, and then how that framework and the truths that the free energy principle discloses can be applied to the formation of an epistemic community.
Yeah, so active inference as a principle is rather simple. It's really just the idea that we try to minimize how much we are likely to dissolve. We don't want to die, so in order to do so we're going to try to map the world and understand what might be coming such that we can avoid moments where we might be dissolving or moments that are dangerous for us, more surprising. We try to create evidence of ourselves, we try to predict ourselves existing in the future, and to do this we make a prediction, act in the world, try to change something, see if it changes the way we thought it was going to change, and then update our model of the world. So you got this sensory active loop where the agent is embedded in the world rather than just outside of it mapping it. So it's a pretty crucial idea that the agent necessarily has a perspective which is defined by how they are separate and yet embedded in the world. They have a boundary, we generally refer to that as a Markov blanket. This boundary is both defining and defined by the outside world and the agent themselves.
So if you understand that the agent necessarily has to map the world in order to predict what's likely to happen, but that the agent is only capable of dealing with their perspective and how much they can compute from their perspective, you understand the agent is fundamentally limited. It has to maximize how much information it has about the world to communicate with potentially other agents which will also be gathering information about the world, not just from each other but from their own experience within the world. Now what we posited when we were doing our research is that it would be more costly to just flat out change your entire model of the world if you are wrong than try to seek out agents who might validate your view of the world and therefore also share the same model. This is where we bring in the notion of niche construction. When agents exist in the world, as I said, they evidence their own existence. To do so they shape the world. So anytime I walk on the grass I make a little dent and I create a little path, and so if other agents like me, same agents with the same model are going to take the same path, eventually that path is going to be pretty obvious. It's going to pull other agents to that path. So I and other agents like me are shaping the environment to resemble us.
So we therefore thought that confirmation bias here was a way for agents to avoid having to constantly change their model and were more likely to be with people like them, create a world that resembles them and eventually create something that resembles an echo chamber, at least on the belief path. What we also posit is the outcome of that is you're not just sharing beliefs, you're creating the world around you such that eventually some communities will in fact create some degree of the beliefs they are sharing in the world around them, which is no longer at all the same world as some other community which may be sharing together another model. And they, it becomes practically incommunicable. Not only are they not sharing the same model, they're not sharing the same world, they're not sampling it the same way and so communicating here is essentially impossible.
Amazing, that's super interesting and I think definitely maps on to people's experiences if they've ever found themselves down the rabbit hole of an echo chamber, whether that's on Twitter or Instagram or wherever. I guess a question that comes to my mind here is that maybe a heuristic idea would be that truth exists as some kind of prior within a generative model that an agent like us has. Like it's important that we tie ourselves in some way to veracity because if not then we're going to be constantly surprised every time something false happens. Or that false-true distinction, it's a bit blurry but you see where I'm going. So a lot of echo chambers are reinforcing their model of the world but it might not necessarily need to subscribe to any notion of external truth. To what degree does that ever butt up against a kind of inherent prior which is that eventually the falsity of your claims is going to come home, or can the echo chamber, the entrenchment just keep going, keep digging as far down as possible?
Yeah, so this is a super interesting idea and we first have to define what we mean by truth and what level of truth. What do we mean by truth? Do we mean something that I can observe? Do we mean something that is verifiable by other agents? And then what level of truth do we mean? The truth of the event, the social truth of the meaning of the event, the fact that to some extent no matter what happens this element will be considered true? Do you see what I mean? Like there's so many ways in which this can break down and what this leads us to is - so this is a theory, this is something I'm trying to develop obviously it's not verified yet so it's still something to take with a few grains of salt but it's a theory that I think naturally follows from what we've done - depending on the level of truth you're talking about and your definition of truth, the fact that something, say, happened or not can be irrelevant. What matters about truth is whether it's actionable to some extent.
So let's take an example. If I decide I can fly but I never act on it, it has no impact on my life. My sensory active loop isn't going to change, my model is not going to change. So I can carry this belief without ever having any consequence. At that level I'm not going to die. But now I can tell other people that I can fly. And if none of us act on it but we all squarely believe we can fly and it serves a social purpose of identifying each other, we know who we are and then we congregate to each other, we create a reality together, we create purposes. What happens then? Where does the buck fall? Where does that belief become a belief that potentially harms us? I think that's the true question.
So think of things that are more contentious like does God exist? Technically there is no way to prove it. Literally part of the definition is that belief in God has to be faith-based, or at least you know for Christian Judeo-Christian beliefs it has to be faith-based, which means by definition you shouldn't need evidence. You should believe without evidence, you should take a leap of faith. Okay, then we by virtue of that we can't verify it, we can't change it. Your belief is kind of impervious. So then what are the outcomes of that belief? How does it allow a community to survive? How does it allow people to survive? And there's a really interesting phenomenon that happens there. Some people will start manufacturing evidence of God. They will start thinking okay well yes it's true I don't need evidence but I can read certain kinds of things as evidence and they will select the kinds of things that count as evidence, i.e. things that they can't ascribe a clear cause to.
So for instance they won't ask God to feed their dog because if they did and the dog doesn't get fed, the dog dies and now they're like well God didn't do it, there's a clear proof here it didn't happen. But something more nebulous like in the future I will get a job. I mean you know like it's highly likely you're gonna, but can you really describe the cause of that? Like you might have sent some resumes but there's no guarantee anyone will pick up your resume. Like it's practically luck at this point. So if it's luck it's God because luck is not something we can ascribe a clear cause to. So then you get these communities that are functional because that belief never really comes into play in their actions. And so you can have weird types of layered beliefs. For certain people like you could have a flat earther be your manager, it probably won't change much. It's not compatible with your beliefs but in terms of the layer that you share, the functional layer that you share, it doesn't come into play.
But if I believe I can fly and therefore you can fly and I tell you well go do it now, fly, jump off the building, now we're going to have a problem. And therefore that kind of belief is less likely to be carried because functionally it's likely to disappear. In terms of self-organization it just is likely to disappear.
Right, yeah that's interesting. I guess it's absolutely right to unpick these different layers and the fact that I guess one way of looking at it is that truth can have this kind of instrumentalist or pragmatic aspect to it but also this something that you know philosophers of language would think about a little bit more in terms of conditional statements and whether something's actually true in the world. I wonder whether therefore if we look at the active inference framework and we try to apply active inference to this, a question that comes up in my head is does for an agent to consider their belief to genuinely be true - because I think what we can say here is if I had the belief that I could fly perhaps I occupy that truth at an instrumentalist level because I'm surrounded by other people who believe that they can fly and it actually gives me a sense of purpose and so I almost delude myself into thinking that but really if push came to shove and someone had me at the top of a cliff edge I probably wouldn't do it because I don't think there's actually a state of the world out there which says Darius can fly. Does the active inference framework require for an agent to believe that there is genuinely solid epistemic grounds to believe that something is ontologically the case, so that I can actually fly, that if I took off that I would need to be able to sample or have sampled evidence for that? Or is there a mechanism that might be peripheral to that which could give me sufficient trust in my model that maybe I would jump off the cliff?
So I think we have to look at how life is realized and how you plan yourself in the future. Right, so let's assume you really think you can fly and your life just doesn't lend itself to it. Like this, how you do, you take the car, you hang around, you have coffee, you work, whatever. It's just, it just never comes into play. You could hold that belief with high certainty because it never gets tested and there's never a risk. Now if you were to start having a real risk like that, it actually like that's that state is not highly unlikely, it's like it's over here and you now have to start testing your own predictions of yourself into the world and you're going to start seeing spikes of free energy like there's like you've never seen anyone fly. You sure you can but you've never seen anyone fly and the risk associated with not flying is really really really high.
I think that's when you start seeing the armor break. Like I think the difference becomes between someone who has lost touch with actual reality like they genuinely believe they can fly and it becomes an actual thing they need to do. Now they probably will do it but they will also probably die, which means that these kinds of beliefs which we generally consider to be psychotic, right, like it's that's the definition, it's a loss of touch with reality no matter what that means. And so when we start couching these ideas in this way we start depathologizing a little bit or like well it's not, they're not sick per se, there's nothing intrinsically wrong with them but their beliefs are no longer aligned with the ecosystem within which we exist. If they were on say the moon for a minute maybe you know they could fly. Like it wouldn't be an impossible belief, it's just not a belief here that that works.
So I think that's why most of the people who hold beliefs that are not related to what we would consider something that happened, like it's not verifiable, it's not something that we can ensure happened or can happen, generally these beliefs don't relate to things that are possibly harmful to them. Like for instance believing in Trump, believe in what Trump says, it's easy to debunk what he says. Like a lot of people have done it, in fact it's actually it takes more time to debunk everything he says than just to listen to him. But it has no impact on your life if you do believe him. Like pragmatically won't hurt you. So it's a very useful tool to lie about things that are completely unverifiable to you. Therefore why not believe them?
Yeah, I think what you spoke about in terms of depathologizing is very interesting. When I was speaking to Karl, for those who are listening they might recall we sort of spoke about the fact that the complete class theorem states that actually any behavior can be cast as Bayes-optimal under some prior beliefs. So I think that's a nice, it leads itself, it lends itself to a humane approach to psychopathology or confirmation bias, less mundane instances of circular reasoning or convincing yourself that something is true when it's clearly not.
Going back to your paper, I thought an interesting thing was, so for those who don't know, Mahault and Maxwell and others sort of created a computational model in addition to the theorizing. Right, so there is the theory and then you would put it in silico and you endowed your silico agents with an a priori hypothesis that or preference that they would be more likely to sample agents who are similar to them, which is in a sense the kind of prior preference which underwrites confirmation bias. My question here is, in that are you stipulating that we too have those prior preferences? Because on one hand yes, I mean that manifests in the behavior and it makes sense in terms of confirming your own model. At the same time humans can also be incredibly flexible creatures who do change their model on the basis of evidence. So firstly is the claim there that that is an actual feature of human cognition and our generative model? And two, if so would you couch that in terms of natural selection and evolutionary pressures or is that even more fundamental to self-organization to sample information from those who are more similar to you?
Right, so confirmation bias was a parameter. It was something we tested within with or on a continuum and we saw what the effects of it were relative to the formation of echo chamber or to the change in beliefs. And then we saw that it had a magnifying effect but it wasn't as simple as just you turn it off and it's gone and you turn it on and it's there. Right, there was still the possibility to form communities without the notion of confirmation bias. It just wasn't as strong and it also depended on the network dynamics. Different networks propagate information differently. So we also had the notion of habit formation. So if you have the need to have habits basically you're going to slowly start sampling the same thing over and over and over again.
So there were a lot of parameters that we used and we found that confirmation bias basically biased the agent's likelihood model to acquire more evidence about their environment if the information confirms their pre-existing beliefs. It was that simple basically. So basically it just made it so that they would still sample people around them but they were more likely to resample somebody that said something that agreed with their model, which is extremely compatible with active inference. Right, you're trying to self-evidence so you're going to try to sample things that seem to agree with your model. So confirmation bias was just a formalization of that specific parameter.
What we see is it's actually adaptive for you to be with people like you. When you are with people like you not only are you likely to understand people better and therefore share information more efficiently, you're also likely to be in an environment that is beneficial for you not just because you craft the environment around you but because if you find yourself with people like you you're probably finding yourself in an environment that benefits those people so you know it's just adaptive. Now it's adaptive to an extent if you're only with people with exactly your same model then you're also very likely to have the same issues and to be vulnerable to the same kind of volatility. It's like monoculture - if you have one type of banana if there's one disease banana they're all going to get it and you no longer have bananas. It's the same idea - you want to continuously grow and change and gather more error and increase your fitness landscape such that you never get to a point where there's an error that none of you saw coming and it just wipes everything out like a Black Swan event.
So there's like a nice middle ground. It is like a super stimulus if you find yourself in an echo chamber. It feels really really good for a time but there's a part of your model, the part that wants exploration, that eventually understands that you're stagnating and something needs to change, something needs to happen. So it's not because we try to confirm our model that we also just want the model to be stationary. We want to minimize free energy and we want to know that we are minimizing free energy right? It's layered in metacognitive so in that sense you want to see yourself going down. So if you're in a plateau you're no longer going down right.
So that's why I think to some extent even when you have a group that seems to agree, that seems to have the same idea, it'll eventually start disagreeing inside. Like there will be people that'll push, that will keep polarizing such that now there's a little bit of a difference. Like you're still some people like "well no okay that's too far, I don't think all of the world is flat, maybe you know a little bit but not all of it" or "I don't think the entire universe is just the planet, that's silly". Do you see what I mean? Like it's the same belief, it's the same kind of moving away from the trajectory that the others are going but you can't always constantly absolutely agree or you cease to learn information. So you'll start again sampling a little bit outside. It's just that if you're stuck in an echo chamber and the echo chamber has drifted drifted drifted drifted drifted so far away from anybody you could ever talk to such that there is no reconciliation point here, you're just going to have like a straight up no there's nothing to hold on to for you to be like "well maybe my model is a little similar but not quite the same so I could you know adapt a little bit". You're there's this ridge is too far, it's too far gone. So it is adaptive for you to be with people like you but if it's too like you then you're stagnating and eventually you're likely to potentially disappear.
Amazing yeah loads of things come to mind from that answer. As you said again, for those listening as you said just important to point out as you said to reduce free energy over time, so-called expected free energy in the actual mathematical formula there is this balance of epistemic and pragmatic actions. So we can't we do have to explore the world and we do have to sample in conditions of uncertainty. So if people are curious this sort of evades the so-called dark room problem which was a kind of an initial contention to the free energy principle which people can read about and it's over 10 years old now these arguments.
I guess listening to this, something that comes to my mind is and well something that comes to my mind and maybe those listening is why does one end up in these states anyway. So maybe I'm listening to this and I might I'm not but I might have been in some hypothetical world a flat earther and I might start panicking saying what does that actually say about me fundamentally that I was amenable to those claims whatsoever. Is there in some computational formulation or just some conceptual formulation an idea about why some people tend more than others to be wrapped up in conspiracy theory or group think, this monolithic way of cognizing rather than cognitive flexibility? And again I don't mean to put these two on sort of binary polarities as if one is amazing and one's terrible as you say we do spend time with people we agree with all of us as we should or else we'd have no friends. But is there a reason perhaps why some people end up really going down that rabbit hole and it's bizarre for those on the outside as to how they've got to that point?
Right so let's always remember that anything we're going to say is a conjecture because social systems are extremely complex and it's a little bit like chaos theory - ascribing one or two causes to a very complex phenomenon is always wrong. We can have a model and it's an approximation but we can't make too many blanket statements so that's how I'm going to caveat what I'm about to say next. The second thing I'm about to say is another caveat is everyone does group think, everyone does it. Like it's just that some group think is considered and that's what I meant by the truth. Yeah in the end can you reproduce any of the experiments that come out from the scientific field? Can you like reproduce a proof? Can you run it yourself? Do you understand everything that comes out? The truth is no, you have to rely on others for an epistemic chain like is this a justifiable belief? Yes maybe I think you know that person looks really confident and other people seem confident in them so I'm you know I'm to follow that and sometimes what their model allows you to do is predictions about the world and those predictions happen to come true so you through abductive inference believe it must be true but it doesn't mean that in fact it could be completely unrelated. Maybe this is just like you know something that happens anyway. If everybody told you you've got to jump and the sun will come up so we've jumped and the sun kept coming up and you're like all right I'll jump and you're like you're right the sun did come up wow that works. So like it could be completely wrong but you still you know that's your best explanation so far it allowed you a prediction your prediction worked okay well there you go there's some evidence for that. In our case it's more along the lines of our beliefs are the right beliefs and our ideology is the right ideology because it leads to XYZ kind of KPI we've arbitrarily defined as the KPIs that correspond to what allows us to minimize free energy but it's highly contentious oftentimes. The KPIs we define are the KPIs that allow us to stay in the state that we are and so it's heavily slanted towards people in power right. Propaganda media etc. all of these tools are built to get you to believe that you are correct and you are doing the right thing and that right thing is to give more money to rich people so you know let's keep that in perspective for the time being.
Why do some people fall down rabbit holes? It's a very known thing that there are key funnels for certain kinds of ideologies because certain kinds of ideologies have a dynamic they very quickly allow you to feel better about yourself, feel better about yourself or feel more in control of the world. Like you now have an answer, you can now understand what's going on, your model feels like it reduced free energy pretty quickly. That's one of the reasons conservatism is often very popular or at least populist conservatism. It tends to rely on very easy very simple answers to very complex problems. Why is your life crap? Immigrants obviously. It's immigrants. It's not the vast complex industrial series of institutions that keep you in a position where everything around you has been eroded to the point where you have nothing to grab on to because that would be really complicated. It's immigrants. So we when we understand that certain kinds of patterns of stark reduction of free energy exist in specific rhetorical patterns we then understand okay well who needs these kinds of reductions? Who are the people that are currently feeling high uncertainty, very vulnerable and need something to hold on to? It's probably people whose model had evidence and sort of no longer does. There is nothing in the world around them that continues to value validate their perspective so now they're searching give me anything anything that will allow me to continue this model of myself which has crafted who I am. My phenotype depends on this model. If it no longer exists now I have to accept that I am at the bottom of the food chain and I don't see a way out because it's complicated.
So who are the people likely to be like that? Well currently it's men who feel like they're in a crisis of masculinity. It's very poor people who feel like they're disenfranchised and nobody's helping them and the only reason that would be the case is because the elites are sucking the blood of babies and to do to fulfill their evil ends to bring more immigrants in because the immigrants are the reason that you don't have jobs anymore etc etc etc. Like these conspiracy theories generally tend to give you erroneous but easy answers and the problem is they're usually very wrong so they have to prop themselves up with these webs of tangled beliefs which locally are a very easy answer right. They're like why do I see this? Well because you know that thing and that thing is conceptually related therefore that must be the answer and so we get into this really interesting space where there's people with incredibly complex webs of where you be like well that doesn't make any sense. If it's more complex why would they hold on to this? Well because remember these things are layered they also get a sense of control from this. They're minimizing free energy somewhere at the level of the easy little answer, the easy little thing they got a small chunk of explanation. It validates their position in the world and they now feel like they have control over things. They understand the world, it's actionable.

What does it allow us to do and maybe perhaps on the flip side of that how does it constrain us so scripts allow us to avoid computing everything all the time because you have a script you can make plans much further into the future you can know how to act in a situation even though it might be a little novel so you stay relatively stable no matter where you go right there's never I mean it's not true if you have a lot of scripts and you know about a lot of scripts no matter where you go you're probably going to be fine you're probably going to know how to get what you need who to talk to when you need something etc etc so because you have these sort of pre-baked policies that have high certainty that you can recognize because you can understand what triggers that script you're very adapted to the environment and that also allows us to avoid friction so when I know what I'm supposed to do at a restaurant I'm not going to cause a big commotion by doing something ridiculous or by doing something highly unexpected for everybody else we're naturally going to self-organize into the purposes we meant to fulfill when we went there that's why it's an interesting experience to go to a different country and make errors and realize oh wow okay my assumptions were wrong this is not how things are done everywhere there are other ways to do things you loosen the prior over this is the script and you add an extra layer of context yeah this is the script here and this is the script here and your model becomes a little bit more complex but also more adaptable so scripts are superb useful for self-organization and for planning over time.

Splendid yeah yeah that that's just a super useful addendum in so far as yeah we we are limited creatures if we could compute if we could do perfect Bayesian inference and compute every single contextual element of our world then then then we probably wouldn't need them right we would just act omnipotently and omnisciently in all context unfortunately well maybe not unfortunately it's probably quite a good thing um you know I was talking about kind of one inherent worry that perhaps all of us have is that we're just becoming the vehicles of our culture that we're acting without really thinking that we're just um yeah that we just embody our norms without really ever having a moment to think well did I choose those did they choose me um this may be irrelevant but I'm curious to see what you think about it um there's an Italian playwright called Pirandello Luigi P who was writing in the early 20th century modernist uh playwright and he wrote a play called um Henry IV and K in Italian and in that um a kind of man acts um they're doing a sort of play in which he is playing the role of a nobleman on a night and he falls off and he ends up believing that he is Henry the 12th century Henry IV and acts accordingly and shapes the whole world so that because he's very rich originally so that all of his butlers end up wearing medieval we and whatever anyway it it it it unravels during the play that actually for the past five years he's known like they will think that he's mad he's actually returned back to his normal condition but continues to act as Henry IV because philosophically those people are more mad than him because he's actually chosen his madness he's chosen his script whereas other people just embody or vehicles for the ideas that are relevant to their context which brings me to something that Jung said which is that um people don't have ideas ideas have people so just s of throwing it out there all of this kind of a smorgasbord of authenticity to what degree um do you think that active inference agents really are anything beyond the contingencies of their time like do we have anything new that we can bring or is it only um a matter of circumstance when we do something kind of random and and change is is there any notion here of like genuine agency o genuine agency I know I know I know I know I know it's full it's loaded that question.

I think agency is a continuum yeah it's first of all agency is really hard to define in psychology you sort of define it but if you try to define it anywhere outside of its functional like observable metrics like they did this and they assigned it to themselves kind of thing um it's really hard to define but if we were to define it as say a degree of entropy let's imagine that I expect you to do this when that right so there's like this absolute baseline that you can be perfectly predicted and then based on that anything you do outside of that prediction is a form of agency like if I don't factor your actions into this you're going to be this but given your actions there's a degree of entropy and uh the more unlikely your actions are the more agentic you might be because you factored into the shift in the decision um let's assume that's a definition but it would be a very contentious one not everybody would agree with that I think we are very agentic we're constantly exploring we're not just exploiting we're not just uh pragmatic we in fact these two terms exist epistemic and pragmatic within the active inference framework where you try to balance between the two you are trying to balance between uh a pragmatic outcome that keeps you alive uh which would be what these people are doing and following the the person they're trying to stay alive and doing what he's saying because they kind of don't have a choice if they want to keep going but to do so they might also be very creative they might improve their model of the world they might be gathering different things they might not act exactly the way he had thought because if he could compute it all then why would why would other people do it you need somebody to gather the knowledge that you currently don't have so there's always a degree to which agents within certain sets are agentic and so that's where we define those scripted super sets there's highly certain things like who has the money well it's not me it's you so that thing I know if I want the money I know that you're going to tell me to do something but in the way in the something in the distance between the moment that something is fulfilled and me fulfilling it there's like there's there's a million miles it's practically infinite like depending on the granularity of the order as well there's there's some um space for agency and so what happens is um we sort of agree on what fulfillment means here maybe you know but you didn't necessarily have a very clear picture of what that fulfillment meant you you have some criteria and everything else kind of falls outside and if we were again fully try to define what those criteria mean we would go in sort of infinite regress of it's impossible to define everything you need a definition to define yeah so um because of that like infinite momy because of that space in between the the the time you are given the action and the fulfillment there is space for agency.

Interesting as you said it probably would ra you know raise some contentions from the philosophers um I guess my my push back on that just to sort of play devil's advocate would be um this notion I mean just back down to the definition of agency and we don't have to go deep into this um because it's somewhat peripheral but I guess it's interesting to to think of it as entropy um away from my expectations of you given my model of you is obviously contingent on my knowledge of you right so if I'm a baby well everyone is super free because they're doing wacky stuff the whole time so I guess the on the complete other end of the spectrum you have a a God or Laplace's demon who can model everything you're going to do and in that you're just kind of some pawn in some chess game so completely depend as you as you said it's dependent yeah exactly it's all perspective um which which I guess is actually one of the fundamental insights of active inference which is that um what is free energy to you might not be free energy to me because we're all self-evidencing or self-organizing for for our own ends for for the maintenance of our own models.

All right excellent um cool well then we we'll jump to the third paper the third theme but it actually all kind of ties together I think which which makes sense given that obviously it's it's your work and these are coherent uh you know coherent interests um you wrote a paper I think it was this year with um with Ali Ali Ramezani who's obviously is a great friend of the Institute um and and helps Daniel out with with everything so shout out to Ali um and this one really piqued my interest um so this is intra-action inference um I think right now it's am I right to say it's only out on arXiv at the moment is that right m uh yes it's the preprint it's still the preprint well definitely people should check out because it's a it's a great paper um they might have to get their head around some terminology uh because it's quite rich with with specific terminology but I'd love to be able to unpick some of the insights that you and Ali uh came uh came up with in that paper I guess the first one here is that you say that um and I can quote here a genuine FE so FE is free energy principle a genuine FE based ontology must reject any discontinuity between matter and subjectivity as FP does not confer any uniqueness to cognitive or active agents the same mathematical technology applies equally to a whole range of entities from inert rocks to the brain so there's a natural tie there to what we've just been talking about in terms of agency and free will but I want to actually stay a little bit away from that and talk more about this discontinuity this um this separation that we in sort of intuitively make between matter and mind or matter and subjectivity just for the kind of um layman people out there go well of course they're different because this is all mental and the chair in front of me is not and okay um so what does this so this sounds bizarre for them what does it mean to reject a discontinuity between matter and subjectivity.

Right so let's start from the beginning please materialization is the key here matter isn't static it's constantly becoming it's shaping itself it's being shaped and basically it's that's that's how what we were discussing which is neomaterialism is distinct from materialism where materialism presupposes elements outside of say the perception of the individual it presupposes it there is a true outside in the world and you have to do your best to figure out what is that truth in neomaterialism we're basically saying it's not that simple um we have basically um a relationship between what is being perceived the perspective the observer and what is being perceived at all like like this this um the element outside is really just um a a relationship between two things becoming together um so basically we we try to recognize that there's an indeterminacy of matter and um the this this move movement of matter is constrained by possibility spaces um so like we discussed like the scripts right scripts are possibility spaces but they are also constrained by say um physical constraints like you can't fly like that's just not a thing yeah um but you know um there are perceptions that shape what you consider to be things around you and you will shape the things based on what you consider to be these things um so basically given these possibility spaces you're going to create metastable formations and you everything is going to align around these metastable formations it's the niche formation idea right and so materialization in this sense is um the iterative process where matter continually redefines limits and boundaries these are are constantly changing and being um negotiated and this negotiation is due to the way that things um self-evidence right so matter being relational and in a sense self-caused because things self-organized is is moving this um this division between the ontology um that aligns the view of um the self and the matter here Everything is self-evidencing Everything is self-organizing and effectively um you you you are also constituting others and they are constituting you others or other things so the the the boundary here is virtual it's dependent on a a third sort of perspective that defines that you are not the thing in front of you um the um this is where we basically determine that there's a probability of sensory state that's interpreted as evident for the agent's existence uh and so everything around you both uh is evidence for your existence and you evidence as well right does that so far is that is that clear.
what does it allow us to do and maybe perhaps on the flip side of that how does it constrain us so scripts allow us to avoid computing everything all the time because you have a script you can make plans much further into the future you can know how to act in a situation even though it might be a little novel so you stay relatively stable no matter where you go right there's never I mean it's not true if you have a lot of scripts and you know about a lot of scripts no matter where you go you're probably going to be fine you're probably going to know how to get what you need who to talk to when you need something etc etc so because you have these sort of pre-baked policies that have high certainty that you can recognize because you can understand what triggers that script you're very adapted to the environment and that also allows us to avoid friction so when I know what I'm supposed to do at a restaurant I'm not going to cause a big commotion by doing something ridiculous or by doing something highly unexpected for everybody else we're naturally going to self-organize into the purposes we meant to fulfill when we went there that's why it's an interesting experience to go to a different country and make errors and realize oh wow okay my assumptions were wrong this is not how things are done everywhere there are other ways to do things you loosen the prior over this is the script and you add an extra layer of context yeah this is the script here and this is the script here and your model becomes a little bit more complex but also more adaptable so scripts are superb useful for self-organization and for planning over time.
Splendid yeah yeah that that's just a super useful addendum in so far as yeah we we are limited creatures if we could compute if we could do perfect Bayesian inference and compute every single contextual element of our world then then then we probably wouldn't need them right we would just act omnipotently and omnisciently in all context unfortunately well maybe not unfortunately it's probably quite a good thing um you know I was talking about kind of one inherent worry that perhaps all of us have is that we're just becoming the vehicles of our culture that we're acting without really thinking that we're just um yeah that we just embody our norms without really ever having a moment to think well did I choose those did they choose me um this may be irrelevant but I'm curious to see what you think about it um there's an Italian playwright called Pirandello Luigi P who was writing in the early 20th century modernist uh playwright and he wrote a play called um Henry IV and K in Italian and in that um a kind of man acts um they're doing a sort of play in which he is playing the role of a nobleman on a night and he falls off and he ends up believing that he is Henry the 12th century Henry IV and acts accordingly and shapes the whole world so that because he's very rich originally so that all of his butlers end up wearing medieval we and whatever anyway it it it it unravels during the play that actually for the past five years he's known like they will think that he's mad he's actually returned back to his normal condition but continues to act as Henry IV because philosophically those people are more mad than him because he's actually chosen his madness he's chosen his script whereas other people just embody or vehicles for the ideas that are relevant to their context which brings me to something that Jung said which is that um people don't have ideas ideas have people so just s of throwing it out there all of this kind of a smorgasbord of authenticity to what degree um do you think that active inference agents really are anything beyond the contingencies of their time like do we have anything new that we can bring or is it only um a matter of circumstance when we do something kind of random and and change is is there any notion here of like genuine agency o genuine agency I know I know I know I know I know it's full it's loaded that question.
I think agency is a continuum yeah it's first of all agency is really hard to define in psychology you sort of define it but if you try to define it anywhere outside of its functional like observable metrics like they did this and they assigned it to themselves kind of thing um it's really hard to define but if we were to define it as say a degree of entropy let's imagine that I expect you to do this when that right so there's like this absolute baseline that you can be perfectly predicted and then based on that anything you do outside of that prediction is a form of agency like if I don't factor your actions into this you're going to be this but given your actions there's a degree of entropy and uh the more unlikely your actions are the more agentic you might be because you factored into the shift in the decision um let's assume that's a definition but it would be a very contentious one not everybody would agree with that I think we are very agentic we're constantly exploring we're not just exploiting we're not just uh pragmatic we in fact these two terms exist epistemic and pragmatic within the active inference framework where you try to balance between the two you are trying to balance between uh a pragmatic outcome that keeps you alive uh which would be what these people are doing and following the the person they're trying to stay alive and doing what he's saying because they kind of don't have a choice if they want to keep going but to do so they might also be very creative they might improve their model of the world they might be gathering different things they might not act exactly the way he had thought because if he could compute it all then why would why would other people do it you need somebody to gather the knowledge that you currently don't have so there's always a degree to which agents within certain sets are agentic and so that's where we define those scripted super sets there's highly certain things like who has the money well it's not me it's you so that thing I know if I want the money I know that you're going to tell me to do something but in the way in the something in the distance between the moment that something is fulfilled and me fulfilling it there's like there's there's a million miles it's practically infinite like depending on the granularity of the order as well there's there's some um space for agency and so what happens is um we sort of agree on what fulfillment means here maybe you know but you didn't necessarily have a very clear picture of what that fulfillment meant you you have some criteria and everything else kind of falls outside and if we were again fully try to define what those criteria mean we would go in sort of infinite regress of it's impossible to define everything you need a definition to define yeah so um because of that like infinite momy because of that space in between the the the time you are given the action and the fulfillment there is space for agency.
Interesting as you said it probably would ra you know raise some contentions from the philosophers um I guess my my push back on that just to sort of play devil's advocate would be um this notion I mean just back down to the definition of agency and we don't have to go deep into this um because it's somewhat peripheral but I guess it's interesting to to think of it as entropy um away from my expectations of you given my model of you is obviously contingent on my knowledge of you right so if I'm a baby well everyone is super free because they're doing wacky stuff the whole time so I guess the on the complete other end of the spectrum you have a a God or Laplace's demon who can model everything you're going to do and in that you're just kind of some pawn in some chess game so completely depend as you as you said it's dependent yeah exactly it's all perspective um which which I guess is actually one of the fundamental insights of active inference which is that um what is free energy to you might not be free energy to me because we're all self-evidencing or self-organizing for for our own ends for for the maintenance of our own models.
All right excellent um cool well then we we'll jump to the third paper the third theme but it actually all kind of ties together I think which which makes sense given that obviously it's it's your work and these are coherent uh you know coherent interests um you wrote a paper I think it was this year with um with Ali Ali Ramezani who's obviously is a great friend of the Institute um and and helps Daniel out with with everything so shout out to Ali um and this one really piqued my interest um so this is intra-action inference um I think right now it's am I right to say it's only out on arXiv at the moment is that right m uh yes it's the preprint it's still the preprint well definitely people should check out because it's a it's a great paper um they might have to get their head around some terminology uh because it's quite rich with with specific terminology but I'd love to be able to unpick some of the insights that you and Ali uh came uh came up with in that paper I guess the first one here is that you say that um and I can quote here a genuine FE so FE is free energy principle a genuine FE based ontology must reject any discontinuity between matter and subjectivity as FP does not confer any uniqueness to cognitive or active agents the same mathematical technology applies equally to a whole range of entities from inert rocks to the brain so there's a natural tie there to what we've just been talking about in terms of agency and free will but I want to actually stay a little bit away from that and talk more about this discontinuity this um this separation that we in sort of intuitively make between matter and mind or matter and subjectivity just for the kind of um layman people out there go well of course they're different because this is all mental and the chair in front of me is not and okay um so what does this so this sounds bizarre for them what does it mean to reject a discontinuity between matter and subjectivity.
Right so let's start from the beginning please materialization is the key here matter isn't static it's constantly becoming it's shaping itself it's being shaped and basically it's that's that's how what we were discussing which is neomaterialism is distinct from materialism where materialism presupposes elements outside of say the perception of the individual it presupposes it there is a true outside in the world and you have to do your best to figure out what is that truth in neomaterialism we're basically saying it's not that simple um we have basically um a relationship between what is being perceived the perspective the observer and what is being perceived at all like like this this um the element outside is really just um a a relationship between two things becoming together um so basically we we try to recognize that there's an indeterminacy of matter and um the this this move movement of matter is constrained by possibility spaces um so like we discussed like the scripts right scripts are possibility spaces but they are also constrained by say um physical constraints like you can't fly like that's just not a thing yeah um but you know um there are perceptions that shape what you consider to be things around you and you will shape the things based on what you consider to be these things um so basically given these possibility spaces you're going to create metastable formations and you everything is going to align around these metastable formations it's the niche formation idea right and so materialization in this sense is um the iterative process where matter continually redefines limits and boundaries these are are constantly changing and being um negotiated and this negotiation is due to the way that things um self-evidence right so matter being relational and in a sense self-caused because things self-organized is is moving this um this division between the ontology um that aligns the view of um the self and the matter here Everything is self-evidencing Everything is self-organizing and effectively um you you you are also constituting others and they are constituting you others or other things so the the the boundary here is virtual it's dependent on a a third sort of perspective that defines that you are not the thing in front of you um the um this is where we basically determine that there's a probability of sensory state that's interpreted as evident for the agent's existence uh and so everything around you both uh is evidence for your existence and you evidence as well right does that so far is that is that clear.
Yeah yeah um just for those who maybe are more familiar with the terminology and active inference am I right to say that this possibility space could be uh defined as an attractor set um that is that bit of a blanket statement uh no I think that's that's interesting so basically um in the possibility spaces or at least according to Thea and the uh you have virtual and actual uh properties and capacities uh and so if we relate them to the dynamics of FE uh and active inference um you basically just have a temporal depth of these possibilities that are um directly afforded to you or potential given say a new agencing of the the elements in play and so yes you have farther away attractor set that are more or less likely given the complexity that would need to be given that would need to give rise to them so if you think of energy energy is just um the the the improbability of something happening high energy means it's highly unlikely for it to happen um and so um when we when we deal with these uh possibility spaces we're basically talking about um the co-constitution of what might happen and what is happening given the collapse of the possibilities by what you are doing and what the world is doing to you so you're constantly in this sort of [Music] um twister in this twister where you act on the world and it acts on you and it's constantly being uh being shaped right.
And I guess an important elision there not only between subjectivity and matter but also ontology and epistemology so ontology this this the study of what is and the epistemology the study of how we know what that is or what it is in the sense that a free energy minimizing agent is in the game of basically getting to know themselves in some strange way so they're garnering evidence for this own implicit model that they have of themselves and the world that they want um given this attractor state so that's a really beautiful way that to know oneself is to be oneself or vice versa and I know Karl has some strange inversion of the Cartesian um I think therefore I am this is this is a really interesting question because I think uh or it's a really interesting area because it yeah I mean just brings up so many fundamental questions one being that I think in your paper you speak about how one can never perfectly actualize a or or or be static in the possibility um set or or put in terms of attracting states you could never be at stasis where you could never be fully attracted to your attractor set um you're always uh in well at least for us we're in this kind of itinerant state where we uh are open to the world and therefore has to deal we have to deal with its kind of stochastic nature um I guess maybe I'm being an idiot what would the world maybe um what would the world look like if we managed to reach that stasis so this I I understand that this dynamic um unfolding this um this mutuality of self and other this getting to know oneself what we're really coming to is the notion that matter as a process rather than as this kind of reified static thing but if that I mean if that process essentially came to a halt are we invoking that matter itself recedes the matter hides matter if matter is processed once this thing stops if it reaches its attracting state if I reach perfect homeostasis whether do I stop is my ontology rooted in my dynamism or is there something over what was the neomaterialist say about that or is there something over and beyond this process of self-evidencing.
No I think you touching upon it I think if there's no more energy if there is no more information being exchanged there's nothing happening and therefore if nothing's happening me you're dead is there a strange paradox there that from the outside right like if the claim is that this extens existential imperative is to minimize free energy to try and get to this precise level of homeostasis it sounds like what we're trying to get to is equilibrium right like it does I just want to stop right like why am I cursed with this fact that I can't right that like I'm cold and H and off you know but like that seems to be the goal but paradoxically it would all stop if that was fulfilled right yeah that that's kind of the way that I'm interpreting what you're saying so again i' careful here I'm not giving a teology to something that doesn't have a teology um but how how do you kind of unpick that paradox.
Yeah, well it's because this isn't we're not meant to fulfill it right we are the way we are because there because the universe is the way it is like the universe leads towards entropy right eventually there is no more energy eventually everything is spent eventually everything is equivalent there's there's no information to be gathered anymore that's just how things are and it and it exists on such a temporal scale on such a massive temporal scale that at the level of us this is and always will be so we are not meant to ever reach a state where there is no information to be exchanged where things don't change anymore so obviously we are constantly pulling in the other direction and it kind of looks like we're trying to reach a point where we no longer move but that will never happen right so it's natural that if the slope is like this you're trying to go like this and and basically what you're saying yeah but what if you reach the top of the mountain what happens then well yeah if we reach the top of the mountain eventually we would cause our own issue right we would we would um we would reach the point we're trying to avoid reaching we'll never really get there and at the same time consider um we are a product of this system because the system is ongoing so we also contribute to reaching this point we are consuming energy and we are going to help eventually reach the heat death of the universe this is not like obviously we're we're trivial at this point right we're a blip but imagine we got better at it then we would probably just make it much much much faster than it would have been otherwise that's what a lot of people think that's what well in many ways that looks like what it kind of looks like what we're doing.

And I guess an important elision there not only between subjectivity and matter but also ontology and epistemology so ontology this this the study of what is and the epistemology the study of how we know what that is or what it is in the sense that a free energy minimizing agent is in the game of basically getting to know themselves in some strange way so they're garnering evidence for this own implicit model that they have of themselves and the world that they want um given this attractor state so that's a really beautiful way that to know oneself is to be oneself or vice versa and I know Carl has some strange inversion of the Cartesian um I think therefore I am this is this is a really interesting question because I think uh or it's a really interesting area because it yeah I mean just brings up so many fundamental questions one being that I think in your paper you speak about how one can never perfectly actualize a or or or be static in the possibility um set or or put in terms of attracting states you could never be at stasis where you could never be fully attracted to your attractor set um you're always uh in well at least for us we're in this kind of itinerant state where we uh are open to the world and therefore has to deal we have to deal with its kind of stochastic nature um I guess maybe I'm being an idiot what would the world maybe um what would the world look like if we managed to reach that stasis so this I I understand that this dynamic um unfolding this um this mutuality of self and other this getting to know oneself what we're really coming to is the notion that matter as a process rather than as this kind of reified static thing but if that I mean if that process essentially came to a halt are we invoking that matter itself recedes the matter hides matter if matter is processed once this thing stops if it reaches its attracting state if I reach perfect homeostasis whether do I stop is my ontology rooted in my dynamism or is there something over what was the neomaterialist say about that or is there something over and beyond this process of self-evidencing.

No I think you touching upon it I think if there's no more energy if there is no more information being exchanged there's nothing happening and therefore if nothing's happening me you're dead is there a strange paradox there that from the outside right like if the claim is that this existential imperative is to minimize free energy to try and get to this precise level of homeostasis it sounds like what we're trying to get to is equilibrium right like it does I just want to stop right like why am I cursed with this fact that I can't right that like I'm cold and H and off you know but like that seems to be the goal but paradoxically it would all stop if that was fulfilled right yeah that that's kind of the way that I'm interpreting what you're saying so again I'm careful here I'm not giving a teleology to something that doesn't have a teleology um but how how do you kind of unpick that paradox.

What does it allow us to do and maybe perhaps on the flip side of that how does it constrain us so scripts allow us to avoid computing everything all the time because you have a script you can make plans much further into the future you can know how to act in a situation even though it might be a little novel so you stay relatively stable no matter where you go right there's never I mean it's not true if you have a lot of scripts and you know about a lot of scripts no matter where you go you're probably going to be fine you're probably going to know how to get what you need who to talk to when you need something etc etc so because you have these sort of pre-baked policies that have high certainty that you can recognize because you can understand what triggers that script you're very adapted to the environment and that also allows us to avoid friction so when I know what I'm supposed to do at a restaurant I'm not going to cause a big commotion by doing something ridiculous or by doing something highly unexpected for everybody else we're naturally going to self-organize into the purposes we meant to fulfill when we went there that's why it's an interesting experience to go to a different country and make errors and realize oh wow okay my assumptions were wrong this is not how things are done everywhere there are other ways to do things you loosen the prior over this is the script and you add an extra layer of context yeah this is the script here and this is the script here and your model becomes a little bit more complex but also more adaptable so scripts are superb useful for self-organization and for planning over time. Splendid yeah yeah that that's just a super useful addendum um in so far as yeah we we are limited creatures if we could compute if we could do perfect Bayesian inference and compute every single contextual element of our world then then then we probably wouldn't need them right we would just act omnipotently and omnisciently in all context unfortunately well maybe not unfortunately it's probably quite a good thing um you know I was talking about kind of one inherent worry that perhaps all of us have is that we're just becoming the vehicles of our culture that we're acting without really thinking that we're just um yeah that we just embody our norms without really ever having a moment to think well did I choose those did they choose me um this may be irrelevant but I'm curious to see what you think about it um there's an Italian playwright called Pirandello Luigi P who was writing in the early 20th century modernist uh playwright and he wrote a play called um Henry IV and K in Italian and in that um a kind of man acts um they're doing a sort of play in which he is playing the role of a nobleman on a night and he falls off and he ends up believing that he is Henry the 12th century Henry IV and acts accordingly and shapes the whole world so that because he's very rich originally so that all of his butlers end up wearing medieval we and whatever anyway it it it it unravels during the play that actually for the past five years he's known like they will think that he's mad he's actually returned back to his normal condition but continues to act as Henry IV because philosophically those people are more mad than him because he's actually chosen his madness he's chosen his script whereas other people just embody or vehicles for the ideas that are relevant to their context which brings me to something that Jung said which is that um people don't have ideas ideas have people so just s of throwing it out there all of this kind of a smorgasbord of authenticity to what degree um do you think that active inference agents really are anything beyond the contingencies of their time like do we have anything new that we can bring or is it only um a matter of circumstance when we do something kind of random and and change is is there any notion here of like genuine agency o genuine agency I know I know I know I know I know it's full it's loaded that question.

I think agency is a continuum yeah it's first of all agency is really hard to define in psychology you sort of define it but if you try to define it anywhere outside of its functional like observable metrics like they did this and they assigned it to themselves kind of thing um it's really hard to define but if we were to define it as say a degree of entropy let's imagine that I expect you to do this when that right so there's like this absolute baseline that you can be perfectly predicted and then based on that anything you do outside of that prediction is a form of agency like if I don't factor your actions into this you're going to be this but given your actions there's a degree of entropy and uh the more unlikely your actions are the more agentic you might be because you factored into the shift in the decision um let's assume that's a definition but it would be a very contentious one not everybody would agree with that I think we are very agentic we're constantly exploring we're not just exploiting we're not just uh pragmatic we in fact these two terms exist epistemic and pragmatic within the active inference framework where you try to balance between the two you are trying to balance between uh a pragmatic outcome that keeps you alive uh which would be what these people are doing and following the the person they're trying to stay alive and doing what he's saying because they kind of don't have a choice if they want to keep going but to do so they might also be very creative they might improve their model of the world they might be gathering different things they might not act exactly the way he had thought because if he could compute it all then why would why would other people do it you need somebody to gather the knowledge that you currently don't have so there's always a degree to which agents within certain sets are agentic and so that's where we define those scripted super sets there's highly certain things like who has the money well it's not me it's you so that thing I know if I want the money I know that you're going to tell me to do something but in the way in the something in the distance between the moment that something is fulfilled and me fulfilling it there's like there's there's a million miles it's practically infinite like depending on the granularity of the order as well there's there's some um space for agency and so what happens is um we sort of agree on what fulfillment means here maybe you know but you didn't necessarily have a very clear picture of what that fulfillment meant you you have some criteria and everything else kind of falls outside and if we were again fully try to define what those criteria mean we would go in sort of infinite regress of it's impossible to define everything you need a definition to define yeah so um because of that like infinite momy because of that space in between the the the time you are given the action and the fulfillment there is space for agency.

Interesting as you said it probably would ra you know raise some contentions from the philosophers um I guess my my push back on that just to sort of play devil's advocate would be um this notion I mean just back down to the definition of agency and we don't have to go deep into this um because it's somewhat peripheral but I guess it's interesting to to think of it as entropy um away from my expectations of you given my model of you is obviously contingent on my knowledge of you right so if I'm a baby well everyone is super free because they're doing wacky stuff the whole time so I guess the on the complete other end of the spectrum you have a a God or Laplace's demon who can model everything you're going to do and in that you're just kind of some pawn in some chess game so completely depend as you as you said it's dependent yeah exactly it's all perspective um which which I guess is actually one of the fundamental insights of active inference which is that um what is free energy to you might not be free energy to me because we're all self-evidencing or self-organizing for for our own ends for for the maintenance of our own models.

All right excellent um cool well then we we'll jump to the third paper the third theme but it actually all kind of ties together I think which which makes sense given that obviously it's it's your work and these are coherent uh you know coherent interests um you wrote a paper I think it was this year with um with Ali Ali Ramezani who's obviously is a great friend of the Institute um and and helps Daniel out with with everything so shout out to Ali um and this one really piqued my interest um so this is intra-action inference um I think right now it's am I right to say it's only out on arXiv at the moment is that right m uh yes it's the preprint it's still the preprint well definitely people should check out because it's a it's a great paper um they might have to get their head around some terminology uh because it's quite rich with with specific terminology but I'd love to be able to unpick some of the insights that you and Ali uh came uh came up with in that paper I guess the first one here is that you say that um and I can quote here a genuine FE so FE is free energy principle a genuine FE based ontology must reject any discontinuity between matter and subjectivity as FP does not confer any uniqueness to cognitive or active agents the same mathematical technology applies equally to a whole range of entities from inert rocks to the brain so there's a natural tie there to what we've just been talking about in terms of agency and free will but I want to actually stay a little bit away from that and talk more about this discontinuity this um this separation that we in sort of intuitively make between matter and mind or matter and subjectivity just for the kind of um layman people out there go well of course they're different because this is all mental and the chair in front of me is not and okay um so what does this so this sounds bizarre for them what does it mean to reject a discontinuity between matter and subjectivity.

Right so let's start from the beginning please materialization is the key here matter isn't static it's constantly becoming it's shaping itself it's being shaped and basically it's that's that's how what we were discussing which is neomaterialism is distinct from materialism where materialism presupposes elements outside of say the perception of the individual it presupposes it there is a true outside in the world and you have to do your best to figure out what is that truth in neomaterialism we're basically saying it's not that simple um we have basically um a relationship between what is being perceived the perspective the observer and what is being perceived at all like like this this um the element outside is really just um a a relationship between two things becoming together um so basically we we try to recognize that there's an indeterminacy of matter and um the this this move movement of matter is constrained by possibility spaces um so like we discussed like the scripts right scripts are possibility spaces but they are also constrained by say um physical constraints like you can't fly like that's just not a thing yeah um but you know um there are perceptions that shape what you consider to be things around you and you will shape the things based on what you consider to be these things um so basically given these possibility spaces you're going to create metastable formations and you everything is going to align around these metastable formations it's the niche formation idea right and so materialization in this sense is um the iterative process where matter continually redefines limits and boundaries these are are constantly changing and being um negotiated and this negotiation is due to the way that things um self-evidence right so matter being relational and in a sense self-caused because things self-organized is is moving this um this division between the ontology um that aligns the view of um the self and the matter here Everything is self-evidencing Everything is self-organizing and effectively um you you you are also constituting others and they are constituting you others or other things so the the the boundary here is virtual it's dependent on a a third sort of perspective that defines that you are not the thing in front of you um the um this is where we basically determine that there's a probability of sensory state that's interpreted as evident for the agent's existence uh and so everything around you both uh is evidence for your existence and you evidence as well right does that so far is that is that clear.
Yeah yeah um just for those who maybe are more familiar with the terminology and active inference am I right to say that this possibility space could be defined as an attractor set um that is that bit of a blanket statement uh no I think that's that's interesting so basically um in the possibility spaces or at least according to Thea and the uh you have virtual and actual properties and capacities uh and so if we relate them to the dynamics of FE and active inference um you basically just have a temporal depth of these possibilities that are directly afforded to you or potential given say a new agencing of the elements in play and so yes you have farther away attractor set that are more or less likely given the complexity that would need to be given that would need to give rise to them so if you think of energy energy is just the improbability of something happening high energy means it's highly unlikely for it to happen um and so when we when we deal with these possibility spaces we're basically talking about the co-constitution of what might happen and what is happening given the collapse of the possibilities by what you are doing and what the world is doing to you so you're constantly in this sort of twister in this twister where you act on the world and it acts on you and it's constantly being shaped right.

And I guess an important elision there not only between subjectivity and matter but also ontology and epistemology so ontology this this the study of what is and the epistemology the study of how we know what that is or what it is in the sense that a free energy minimizing agent is in the game of basically getting to know themselves in some strange way so they're garnering evidence for this own implicit model that they have of themselves and the world that they want um given this attractor state so that's a really beautiful way that to know oneself is to be oneself or vice versa and I know Carl has some strange inversion of the Cartesian um I think therefore I am this is this is a really interesting question because I think uh or it's a really interesting area because it yeah I mean just brings up so many fundamental questions one being that I think in your paper you speak about how one can never perfectly actualize a or or or be static in the possibility um set or or put in terms of attracting states you could never be at stasis where you could never be fully attracted to your attractor set um you're always uh in well at least for us we're in this kind of itinerant state where we ...

No I think you touching upon it I think if there's no more energy if there is no more information being exchanged there's nothing happening and therefore if nothing's happening me you're dead is there a strange paradox there that from the outside right like if the claim is that this existential imperative is to minimize free energy to try and get to this precise level of homeostasis it sounds like what we're trying to get to is equilibrium right like it does I just want to stop right like why am I cursed with this fact that I can't right that like I'm cold and H and off you know but like that seems to be the goal but paradoxically it would all stop if that was fulfilled right yeah that that's kind of the way that I'm interpreting what you're saying so again I'm careful here I'm not giving a teleology to something that doesn't have a teleology um but how how do you kind of unpick that paradox.

What does it allow us to do and maybe perhaps on the flip side of that how does it constrain us so scripts allow us to avoid computing everything all the time because you have a script you can make plans much further into the future you can know how to act in a situation even though it might be a little novel so you stay relatively stable no matter where you go right there's never I mean it's not true if you have a lot of scripts and you know about a lot of scripts no matter where you go you're probably going to be fine you're probably going to know how to get what you need who to talk to when you need something etc etc so because you have these sort of pre-baked policies that have high certainty that you can recognize because you can understand what triggers that script you're very adapted to the environment and that also allows us to avoid friction so when I know what I'm supposed to do at a restaurant I'm not going to cause a big commotion by doing something ridiculous or by doing something highly unexpected for everybody else we're naturally going to self-organize into the purposes we meant to fulfill when we went there that's why it's an interesting experience to go to a different country and make errors and realize oh wow okay my assumptions were wrong this is not how things are done everywhere there are other ways to do things you loosen the prior over this is the script and you add an extra layer of context yeah this is the script here and this is the script here and your model becomes a little bit more complex but also more adaptable so scripts are superb useful for self-organization and for planning over time.

and I guess an important elision there not only between subjectivity and matter
but also ontology and epistemology so ontology this this the study of what is
and the epistemology the study of how we know what that is or what it is in the sense that a free energy minimizing
agent is in the game of basically getting to know themselves in some
strange way so they're garnering evidence for this own implicit model that they have of themselves and the
world that they want um given this attractor state so that's a really beautiful way that to know oneself is to
be oneself or vice first and I Know Carl has some strange inversion of the
cartisian um I think therefore I am this is this is a really interesting
question because I think uh or it's a really interesting area because it yeah
I mean just brings up so many fundamental questions one being that I think in your paper you speak about how
one can never perfectly actualize a or
or or be static in the possibility um set or or put in terms of attracting
States you could never be at stasis where you could never be fully attracted to your attractor set um you're always
uh in well at least for us we're in this kind of itinerant state where we uh are open to the world and therefore has to
deal we have to deal with its kind of stochastic nature um I guess maybe I'm being an
idiot what would the World maybe um what would the world look like if we managed
to reach that stasis so this I I understand that this Dynamic um unfolding this um this
mutuality of self and other this getting to know oneself what we're really coming
to is the notion that matter as a process rather than as this kind of rified static
thing but if that I mean if that process essentially came to a halt are we
invoking that matter itself recedes the matter hides matter if matter is
processed once this thing stops if it reaches its attracting state if I reach
perfect homeo States whether do I stop is my ontology rooted in my dynamism or
is there something over what was the any materialist say about that or is there something over and Beyond this process
of self- evidencing no I think you touching upon it I think if there's no more energy if
there is no more information being exchanged there's nothing happening and
therefore if nothing's happening me you're dead is there a strange Paradox there
that from the outside right like if the claim is that this extens existential
imperative is to minimize free energy to try and get to this precise level of
homeostasis it sounds like what we're trying to get to is equilibrium right like it does I just
want to stop right like why am I cursed with this fact that I can't right that
like I'm cold and H and off you know but like that seems to be the goal but
paradoxically it would all stop if that was fulfilled right yeah that that's
kind of the way that I'm interpreting what you're saying so again i' careful here I'm not giving
a Tey to something that doesn't have a teolog um but how how do you kind of
unpick that Paradox yeah well it's because this isn't we're not meant to
fulfill it right we are the way we are because there because the universe is
the way it is like the universe leads towards entropy right
eventually there is no more energy eventually everything is spent eventually everything is equivalent
there's there's no information to be gathered anymore that's just how things are and it and it exists on such a
temporal scale on such a massive temporal scale that at the level of us this is and
always will be so we are not meant to ever reach a state where there is no
information to be exchanged where things don't change anymore so obviously we are
constantly pulling in the other direction and it kind of looks like we're trying to reach a point where we
no longer move but that will never happen right so it's natural that if the
slope is like this you're trying to go like this and and basically what you're saying yeah but what if you reach the
top of the mountain what happens then well yeah if we reach the top of the mountain eventually we would cause our
own issue right we would we would um we would reach the point we're trying to
avoid reaching we'll never really get there and at the same time consider um we are
a product of this system because the system is ongoing so we also contribute to
reaching this point we are consuming energy and we are going to help
eventually reach the heat dep of the universe this is not like obviously we're we're trivial at this point right
we're a blip but imagine we got better at it then we would probably just make it much much much faster than it would
have been otherwise that's what a lot of people think that's what well in many ways that looks like what it kind of
looks like what we're doing yes I um yeah maybe I need to just banish this romantic notion that there might be some
top of the mountain um my sopian struggle will actually have a have some
benefit you know some positive outcome I think something that you mentioned there
in passing which is really important and really interesting and might not always be made explicit to
those who are learning about active inference is that we're talking about information here so I'd love for you to
um be able to I I'd love to hear a bit more about information um we think of
Mata again as this kind of static entity the models that we we learn at school um
but at least to my very Layman ears we have this with um free energy principle
and just modern physics as it's unfolding this really beautiful convergence of matter and information
and you have uh statistical mechanics and you have stuff like Shannon information and all of these really
fascinating Concepts when you say that we will get to a point where there is no more information trans er um where
basically yeah just everything is as is um again I just digging into the
ontology there is that to say that and I know there's no hard and fast answer is
that like are you postulating some kind of it from bits as David Charmers would
say that like kind of the fundamental unit that we're talking here is information and matter is in some way
emerging from that is is there some ontological hierarchy ontological structure that you can point to there or
is it fuzzy so that's an active area of
research obviously there is no perfect answer in the relationship between information and matter like we can
always point to the land hour principle you know uh we can talk about um how um
mass and energy are related and if you have energy then you have a sense of information because effectively
um information is related to the concept survival where like the negative log
probability of an observation becoming true uh is effectively you know
surprisal and therefore information so there's a relationship there right and
if what we're talking about is the relationship between um you subjectivity
and therefore perception and uh or at least Observer Dynamics and matter which
are mutually shaping their is a sense in which the way that information is is is
exchanged effectively shapes the boundary which gives rise to what we con
consider um the ontological stale scale at which matter exists so in a sense yes
but really when we talk about information we're really talking about a degree to which
um a certain bound on a surprise is related to a sensory data in a model
of the world so um information is
negentropy when you have unlikely something that's
information if everything is equally likely then there's no information there
right so that's where we get to this relationship between the heat death of the universe and the absolutely
equivalent um probabilities for anything because there is nothing there and the fact that uh if
you reach the point where you weren't exchanging any information effectively
uh you you there's nothing going on there there is no information to exchange yeah I think that that sheds
light on um a potential point of confusion that people might have when they read the active influence literature which is that when we're
talking about self-information we are not talking about
a kind of self- evidencing result maximal self-information is not self-
evidencing in fact it's quite the opposite um so that's that's that's useful to remember that the in like if
everything was unfolding predictably you would have less information right like your model would be working optimally if
you're getting more information out of your model well then there's some Divergence going on here and so so so
yeah it can all be kind of cast as this um quite simple statistical picture
excellent good well M the last thing I want to speak to about I mean this was fascinating and honestly on this topic I
would love to just go on forever um because you've also got another um excellent paper that people should check
out which is about Consciousness um and holographic
screens and so there's plenty there's plenty for people to get their teeth into and we've really barely touched the
surface but I guess the last thing that I want to speak about in some depth is your work at
verses um um and artificial intelligence and and your PhD as well of course which
is in cognitive Computing so obviously within the um the limits of disclosure
and how much you're allowed to talk about maybe you could kind of give us a little bit of information pardon the pun
about what versus is what versus does um and how it's kind of
revolutionizing intelligence in some ways um and and how that's being embodied or encoded into artificial
agents right so I guess I can give you the key
difference most people consider just like we discussed that intelligence is a
property of an inside and that everything else is
outside what we consider is that intelligence is a phenomenon it happens
as a function of the interactions between different kind of um individuals
agents objects there is information being passed and it's the integration of
this information that can be self-reflexive through different kinds of boundaries that enable acting in a
specific kind of way relative to an outcome you wish to see happen so you
acrw agency uh given how much information you can sort of pull together
so our approach to intelligence is shared intelligence and um we consider
that shared intelligence is not just about shared bits of
data it's also creating perspectives forcing and embedding into the world and
because you have an embedding into the world you have the possibility to dissolve and when you have the possibility to dissolve and information
you have veilance when you have veilance you have emotion and then you have the
possibility for empathy you have the possibility for theory of Mind coordination cooperation and eventually
shared intelligence these are key elements that have not been used in the literature so
far at least are not being um delved into as much from say the machine
learning uh crowd they're doing amazing work they've allowed for very deep U
processing of data but this data is always decontextualized the key issue currently
is llms hallucinate and they hallucinate because they have no clue what the
context really is or what you're trying to do really and where they are relative
to this context they have no Loop and more than no Loop they have um no true
sense of how to coordinate with you they don't know if something happened they
they don't know if you're happy with the answer really like you can give a thumb up or a thumb down to Chad GPT but while
it's giving the answer it doesn't have that so all of these elements together make it so that U potentially this
approach is going to hit a wall our approach is more natural and gives rise
to this fundamental principle of mutual information exchange where in order to
improve your model of the world you have to get to know the thing in front of you better you have to integrate part of it
as a part of you and now you're shaping each other so this whole alignment problem sort of falls out because it's
no longer one about One True Value alignment it's about how all of these
pieces coordinate together and create create a harmonious self-organizing
system that reaches towards something that resembles a metastable state
awesome so just to kind of backtrack there and and maybe give a a broader
picture um really good that we now have a kind of understanding of of of what versus is trying to implement I thought
the mention of kind of the machine learning LW and the llms is really useful here because people have I think
have in a notion now because there's been so much news about chat gbt and Bard and neural networks that that's
what artificial intelligence is perhaps you could give us a very simple um
carving up of the space in which if you could a very brief sort of synopsis
about how what an llm is what a large language model is how it works what you know like vector spaces
and probabilities and stuff like this and then what an active inference system
might look like um whether that is embodied or not so I might be leading
you down a down the path yeah so essentially uh Transformers or attention
mechanisms that have self attention and attention to uh the text in question
they embed different uh relationships between different
different words that give you essentially a probability of a next word being produced uh it's really that
simple it's a it's a hierarchy that retains certain words and then gives you probabilities at different scales so the
more complex your Transformer hierarchy the more complex your attention can be
but effectively it's just that it's what is the probability of this word given that that word and that word and that
word were said so it's content to content really it's not it doesn't
understand the structure of the world it doesn't have a model what it has is just
a sort of given this word that word given that word that word given that word that word and it's very performant
because knowledge the acrude knowledge that we have grafted in
language has a sort of underlying model you know like we
don't talk nonsense most of the time when we talk we try to make sense we
we're not just spouting out a bunch of random words out of nowhere that speak to nothing of our reality but that's
limited to that our approach basically gives our
our models the capacity to from what it observes create another
layer and that layer tries to understand what the causes are why the this happen
not what word preempted that word but why was that word used and in that case
what you would get if you created an an llm with an active inference agent what
you would do is it's not just something that predicts the next word it's
something that predicts the cause of the next word and therefore has a sense of
why you're saying what you're saying what you're trying to do and what it might say if it chooses to go along with
that perspective um another difference is that the Elms are not really placing
themselves in that Loop it has self attention relative to words but it
doesn't know what it is right it doesn't know what its actions are it can't make
a choice relative to an objective that's something that you get if you have an
agent that places itself within the loop and under understands the outcomes of its own actions relative to these uh to
these causes great yeah yeah that's a really useful um separation there
distinction between the two um an interesting aside that we could get into but maybe it's maybe down the time it's
not worth it which is about the degree to which language does indeed refer to some external world because you have all
the exter you know the semantic externalist semantic internalist I'm sure Mr Chomsky would have something interesting to say but actually I'll
refrain um something I have heard which I think is bit more interesting and I I
was really happy that you mentioned the action perception Loop that you are encoding but maybe a better word there
would be that you're embodying or you're allowing these agents to embody and I really want to have just a moment to
speak about embodiment because these large language models don't have sensory
States they don't have active States and and for anyone who's seen a markof blanket that seems pretty fundamental to
to Adaptive intelligence to being able to enact self-organization in the way
that we do it um something that I have heard is that in some ways this
embodiment grants us and perhaps the robots in the end with a sort of care um
and I mean care they're in the hiigaran sense there there's a kind of um there's
a tendency to lean to towards the world in the way in which we're interested in the way it's coupled to us and and the
way it interacts with us and the way we interact with it whereas if we are not embodied exactly because you don't have
that causal impact on the world um you don't you don't embody that
fundamental phenomenology of care um it doesn't really mean much to you to put
it in s of layman's terms I guess bringing it back to some a topic that
always I want to speak about and need to stop speaking about so much is
consciousness it's a very loaded question but is there a degree to which
embodying an artificial intelligence doesn't just endow it with um goals that
are just in principle more align with ours but an actual sense of
phenomenology a Consciousness and if not why not and if
not what else would we need to add and again I'm not expecting you to solve the hard problem in 10 minutes but just what
is the kind of active inference perspective on a question like that right so I think we need to
reformulate what embodiment means I think embodiment is just a relation to
self within a context right and so because because why would a body just
mean this yeah are you less embodied or you're in when you're in the virtual world I would argue you actually are
because in effect your perception of your own body is just an illusion created by your brain so what is
embodiment really I think embodiment is that it's a relationship to self relative to context which means there's
a boundary somewhere if you are the entire context
there's no boundary so there's no real embodiment you have to somehow separate
separates something now maybe you separate your own Parts maybe you are
every part but you understand how the different parts are different from one another that's maybe one thing right if
you if you imagine the the scenario of a say an Overlord AI that is connected to everything and everyone its embodiment
might be how it can pull different strands of perspectives given its
different pieces for instance so we have to rethink our understanding of embodiment
to be a little less centered on our own experience and this leads us to
isometry why would phenomenology only be given to something that resembles a
physical because I imagine that's what you kind of had in mind right you had sort of in mind like an humanoid sort of
Android thing which we we would give to an AI and therefore they would be anchored in the world in the same way
that we are and if effectively that would give them a phenomenology but I think if we're thinking of embodiment
we're really just thinking of how the thing the agent relates to
itself relative to its boundaries and how those boundaries Define how
information is processed relative to its
objectives I think the problem with that is that it doesn't ensure that we will
understand each other what we want is to endow the AI with the possibility to
truly grock us and for us to truly grock it we need to be able to exchange this
information in a way that's you know useful um so we tend to want to give it
an embodiment that resembles ours I do think embodiment in the sense that I
defined it is required for what we understand to be Consciousness because you need the boundaries to reflect each
other without the boundaries reflecting each other you have a form of
information being integrated but you don't have self and therefore you don't
have self- reflection and I don't think given that you necessarily have
um access and agency over that access you just have you know movement along
some gradients um so that's what I think will be required to give a form of Consciousness to um AIS that have a
version of embodiment but just to clarify are you saying that a um
recursive or embedded system of markof blankets in which information is being
exchanged up and down and in which errors are being passed up and um
temporally slower levels contextualizing these higher order levels are you saying that
is sufficient for Consciousness I understand that it might be necessary for Consciousness but something that
I've heard you and Maxwell speak about actually on with the active inference
Institute is this notion that the that Consciousness might might entail some
layer of that cake which is so-call right only so it isn't being
contextualized it it it it's just I don't know what issuing information how
would you what does that model look like um and have I well yeah um I I I don't
want to completely butcher it so I I'll pass it over to you I think the right only parts of the models are
just they're dependent like um depending on the scale everything can be right
only like it's it's it's really a question of what is the degree of access
and I think when we Define right only we Define the conditions for the thing to survive you don't have a choice but to
breathe air right you don't have a choice but to drink water these are not
um choices you're making so to some extent there is one layer at which
something is like it has to happen right um and therefore it's not something that
um that is written on because it's likely to change so at the level of an AI That's
what I mean by the perspectival aspect of their embodiment with a boundary if they have
a boundary some boundary whatever that boundary is they have a condition for that boundary to be dissolved and that
condition those conditions Define the right only uh
layers of the boundary does that mean in some sense
that being able to for the system to recognize it it's distinct from
something else from everything else is a prerequisite condition for Consciousness
within this model that's right that's right in order for an a thing to have a
self and an embodiment it has to be somehow bound from other things like it
it has to be different to some extent or it has to be able to take perspectives
that enable this difference like I said if you had this Overlord that can pull into different consciousnesses it would
still for a time being be able to pull this specific boundary and embody it in
a sense yes yes and that and that feeds back very nicely into this Hy doarian notion of care to take a stance on
something I think is a way that he might Express that wonderful I mean I I guess
my final comment on this would be what given this given that a kind of um the
perspectival the the self versus other distinction is so at least in this model crucial to a sense of what it is like to
be anything how much Credence or how do you rejoinder those who speak of um
boundless Consciousness experiences or um yeah
ego death or Oneness are these um
delusional do they or do they invoke some minimal sense of self where do they
fit into this story so I think that's a really interesting
topic and I'm not someone who's going to um invalidate anyone's experience so
obviously again take what I'm saying with a grain of salt your experience trumps my perspective on your experience
what I think happens is you're not actually
dissolving right you are dissolving certain layers of what generally
constitutes yourself and that experience
is powerful and transcendental and because you feel like
what usually constitutes yourself is dissolved you feel like you're connected
to everything else but you're not you're still you you're still embedded in your
body right these practices are conceptual and tap into what we believe
to be what that would be like but the truth is you don't know no one who's
ever reported that experience wasn't in a body so I think we all tap into that
same experience when we go through something that resembles ego death in the sense that there are layers that
become um Nill like we dissolve these layers but not all layers which means on
a fundamental level that infinite Consciousness is still being tapped into
from a perspective awesome yeah I mean um I
guess I ought to point people to where this philosophical Foundation is and people should definitely check out
Thomas metzinger um and something that's really important to point out here is that when we're talking about self one
ought to keep in mind that there's a distinction here between the so-call ontological self this kind of entity
that I think people instinctively associate with a kind of cartisian Soul this unchanging entity and perhaps what
we're more concerned with which is the so-called phenomenal self model how the system um models itself how it reflects
on its own being how it takes a stance on its own being and what it conceives of itself and perhaps the attenuation of
some of the self- modeling is exactly what's happening in psychedelics and here we speak to people like George Dean
who I'm trying to get on and I think that would be fascinating and some of the work that I'm working on is is
completely to do with self modeling so so if this is all very neatly tied into current work going on in active
inference M this has been awesome um I know I know our time is basically up um
where what so what what do people have to look forward to on your side what what are the kind of interesting things
that you're working on where can people find you uh where can people reach out to you if they're exhilarated by the
stuff we've spoken about today and want to find out more so I'm working on several papers
one uh on uh emergence in uh in active inference I'm also working on a paper on
self-esteem and how to model it in social groups and I'm working on a paper on sustainability and how uh that rises
from the notion of resilience and mutually uh effective resilience um you
can find me on LinkedIn on Google Scholar uh and uh sometimes on Twitter
very very rarely I would much more encourage people to reach out to me U by
email if they find it on one of my papers or on LinkedIn directly awesome thank you Ma this was
great thank you