
Logo
Login | Register
  
Home 
JOIN ISSS 
Meetings 
Members 
SIGs 
Library 
Search

2024 Washington DC Speakers and Schedule
 
This Year's 68th International Society for Systems Sciences Annual Conference
influence and responsibility
 
his year, the meeting was held in downtown Washington DC 
 
Click here to review the programme
Call for Papers Here 


The hybrid meeting was held both online and in person at the Open Gov Hub - 1100 13th St NW, STE 800, Washington, DC 20005   Dates: 9 – 13 June 2024  
 
The conference was followed by a one-day workshop on cybernetics and governance on June 14th. This was followed by the American Society for Cybernetics Meeting from June 15 to 19 and the Archetypes conference from June 15 to 18, all in Washington, D.C.
 
 
Meeting Session Recordings
 
Plenary programs, Member Papers, Workshops, and other Presentations
 
The recordings are presented in thematic groups on the members' conference page. Please click here to view them. The purpose of the thematic groupings is to 1) cluster and focus attention on the society's current main interests and 2) to help connect the related silos of the work and special interest groups. With about 50 talks the average size of each of the five groups is around 10, so that people can browse one group then another.

Theme
 
The theme for the conference was influence and responsibility. We all have our spheres of influence. As systems scientists, we have a responsibility to let others know about the work we do. The world is a troubled place, and organizations are trying to navigate in a complex context. Successful navigation partly depends on having good conceptual tools that are suited to meet the challenges. Institutions and organizations have the responsibility to be as well informed as possible about systems science, cybernetics, and complexity theory, at the very least. As a species, we cannot afford to make too many more mistakes. 
 
 
THE PLENARY SPEAKERS 
 
Ranulph Glanville Memorial Lecture: Stuart Umpleby 
 

 
Stuart Umpleby is Professor Emeritus of Management at George Washington University.  He is a past president of the American Society for Cybernetics.  He served as president of the Executive Committee of the International Academy for Systems and Cybernetic Sciences, an honor society.  As a student, he studied with Heinz von  Foerster and Ross  Ashby at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign.  He attended many meetings of the European Meetings on Cybernetics and Systems Research in Vienna, Austria.

His website is blogs.gwu.edu/umpleby
 
Bertalanffy Lecture: George Mobus 
 

 
George E. Mobus is Associate Professor Emeritus of Computer Science & Systems and Computer Engineering & Systems in the School of Engineering and Technology at the University of Washington Tacoma. He received his PhD in computer science from the University of North Texas in 1994. His dissertation, and subsequent research program at Western Washington University (under National Science Foundation Grant No. IIS-9907102), involved developing autonomous robot agents by emulating natural intelligence as opposed to using some form of artificial intelligence. Mobus was awarded US Patent: #5,504,839, "Processor and Processing Element for Use in a Neural Network". He also received an MBA from San Diego State University in 1983, doing a thesis on the modeling of decision support systems based on the hierarchical cybernetic principles presented in this volume and in numerous papers. His baccalaureate degree was earned at the University of Washington (Seattle) in 1973, in zoology. He studied the energetics of living systems and the interplay between information, evolution, and complexity. 
 
Before completing his academic pursuits of a Ph.D., he had risen through the ranks of a small controls engineering company in Southern California, from software engineer to the top spot. The credit for success goes to the education he got in systems sciences during his MBA program and helping reshape many of the internals of the company that improved profitability and work conditions.
 
He is the author of “Systems Science: Theory, Analysis, Modeling, and Design” (Springer, 2022) and along with coauthor Michael Kalton, wrote the book, “Principles of Systems Science” (Springer, 2015). He was the President of the International Society for the Systems Sciences (ISSS), 2021-22 and Editor-in-Chief for another Springer book series, The International Federation for Systems Research Series on Systems Science and Systems Engineering.
 
 
 
Dr. Salvador Peniche Camps
Departamento de Economía, Centro Universitario de Ciencias Económico Administrativas
Universidad de Guadalajara, Jalisco, México
 

 
The Socio environmental information system for sustainability and democracy.
 
A systemic experiment for applied public policy. The socio-environmental collapse of the upper basin of the Santiago River, where one of the industrial and agricultural export centers of the country is located, has created the context for the application of alternative adaptation and remediation strategies. We present an exercise in political and academic activism based on trans-disciplinary, uncertainty and systemic issues.

 
Prof. Dr Dorien  DeTombe (MSc. Ph.D.) 
Founder and Chair International Research Society on Methodology of Societal Complexity 
University of Sumatera Utara, Medan, Indonesia
Sichuan University, Chengdu, P.R. China and Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Europe  
 
http://www.complexitycourse.org/doriendetombe.html
 
www.doriendetombe.nl
 
 

Prof. Dr Dorien DeTombe is the founder and chair of the field Methodology for Societal Complexity. She developed the Compram Methodology for political decision-making on complex societal issues like sustainable development, terrorism, credit crisis, climate change, floods, traffic, healthcare, COVID-19, HIV/Aids, and water affairs. The Compram Methodology is advised by the OECD to handle Global Safety. She studied social science and computer science. Her doctorate is in Methodology for Societal Complexity. She spent her main career at Utrecht University and Delft University of Technology in The Netherlands and has since 2015 connected with Sichuan University, Chengdu, P.R. China, and since 2023, she has research professor at the University of Sumatera Utara, Medan, Indonesia. She is a facilitator of many workshops on complexity.  She published many books and more than 150 articles. She gives lectures and workshops as a Visiting Professor and Conferences all over the world. She organizes yearly conferences and is the editor of many journals. She is on the board of many research groups and established a worldwide research network on the International Society on Methodology of Societal Complexity. 
 
 
Hrvoj Vančik - Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry
University of Zagreb, Croatia
 

 
 
Abstract 
The complexity of an entity is interpreted as a combination of three components: synchronic, diachronic, and combinatorial. The possible limitations in the increase of complexity are examined for all of these three components. As synchronic or structural complexity depends on the energy of interactions during the formation of particles of higher complexity level from the components on the lower level, the most complex structures consist of the entities that are bound to each other so loosely that the formation of the higher complexity level is not probable. This intention of the synchronic complexity to disappear is formulated as the principle of diminishing interactions. 
The limits of diachronic and structural complexity stem from the analysis of the relationship between diversity (represented by Shannon entropy) and complexity. The maximum of combinatorial complexity appears in the state in which Shannon entropy and the fractal dimension reach values close to the Golden ratio. 
Systems are defined as consisting of the entities (actualities) that have their position within the three component "complexity space" (synchronic, diachronic, and combinatorial). Since the system is formed from various interconnected actualities, it can be represented as a topological structure by using graph theory. The different types of graphs representing systems are mathematically analyzed by using  "adjacency matrices" and their determinants, which can be reduced to characteristic polynomials with the solutions known as a spectrum of the graph. It is argued how such graph theoretical interpretation of systems could provide a new view on the teleological problem of function to which the system should be adapted.  
 
 
Michael R. Nelson
Senior Fellow, Asia Program
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
 



Twitter: @MikeNelson
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/michaelnelson5/

Mike Nelson is a senior fellow in the Carnegie Asia Program. He helps decision-makers around the world understand and address the impacts of emerging technologies, such as digital technologies, biotechnology, and machine learning. Prior to joining Carnegie, he started the global public policy office for Cloudflare. Nelson has also served as a principal technology policy strategist in Microsoft’s Technology Policy Group. In addition, Nelson has taught courses on the future of the internet, cyber policy, technology policy, innovation policy, and e-government in the Communication, Culture, and Technology Program at Georgetown University.
 
Nelson spent nine years as director of Internet technology and strategy at IBM, where he managed a team that helped define and implement IBM’s Next-Generation Internet strategy. From 1988 to 1993, he served as a professional staff member for the Senate’s Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space and was the lead Senate staffer for the High-Performance Computing Act. In 1993, he joined Vice President Al Gore at the White House and worked with President Bill Clinton’s science adviser on issues relating to the Global Information Infrastructure.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2024 International Society for the Systems Sciences | Club Website by Membership Space | Terms of Use | Admin
